# Empirical Exercise 2, Part 1

Like Empirical Exercise 1, this exercise makes use of the data set [E1-CohenEtAl-data.dta](https://pjakiela.github.io/ECON523/exercises/E1-CohenEtAl-data.dta), 
a subset of the data used in the 
paper [Price Subsidies, Diagnostic Tests, and Targeting of Malaria Treatment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial](https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20130267) 
by Jessica Cohen, Pascaline Dupas, and Simone Schaner, published in the _American Economic Review_ in 2015.  The authors examine behavioral responses to 
various discounts ("subsidies") for malaria treatment, called "artemisinin combination therapy" or "ACT."  An overview of the randomized evalaution is available [here](https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/publication/2011.12.15-Subsidizing-Malaria.pdf).

This exercise has three objectives.  The first is to review the idea of selection bias by showing that individuals who choose to take up a treatment (in this case, 
artemisinin combination treatment, or ACT, for malaria) often differ from those who do not take up treatment (when treatment is not randomized).  In doing so, we will also 
review the different approaches to testing whether the mean of a(n outcome) variable is the same in two groups (defined by another variable).    

Please upload your answers to gradescope after completing the exercise.  You can also download the entire activity 
as a [do file](https://pjakiela.github.io/ECON523/exercises/E2-questions.do).  

<br>

## Getting Started 

We can use the same code that we used in Empirical Exercise 1 to load the data:
```
// LOAD DATA

clear all 
set more off
set seed 12345
version 16.1 // feel free to use version 17.0 instead

** load the data from the course website
webuse set https://pjakiela.github.io/ECON523/exercises
webuse E1-CohenEtAl-data.dta
```
You can create a new do file that begins with this code, or you can copy your code from Exercise 1.  Make sure that you save your do file in an appropriate folder; you will probably also want to add a `cd` (change directory) command so that any Stata output generated by your do goes to a place where you can find it later.

The variable `act_any` is a treatment dummy equal to 1 for observations in the treatment group and equal to zero otherwise.  The variable `c_act` is an indicator 
for having used ACT when they last had malaria.  The data set also includes several variables capturing the baseline (i.e. pre-treatment) characteristics of the households in the sample.  These variables all begin with `b_`.  Familiarize yourself with these variables by typing
```
sum b_*
```
to summarize all the variables in the data set that begin with `b_`.  


## Empirical Exercise  

We are going to test whether individuals *in the control group* who use ACT when they have malaria (i.e. individuals with `c_act==1`) differ from those 
in the control group who do not use ACT (i.e. those with `c_act==0`) in terms of observable characteristics.  To focus on individuals in the control group, 
we'll want to restrict ourselves to data points with `act_any==0` when answer the following questions.  

### Question 1  

Use the `ttest` command to test whether individuals in the control group who use ACT when they have malaria (i.e. individuals with `c_act==1`) differ from those 
in the control group who do not use ACT when they have malaria in terms of the educational attainment of their head of household.  What Stata command would you use to do this?  

### Question 2  

What is the mean level of (household head) educational attainment among individuals in the control gorup who **did not** use ACT the last time they had malaria?

### Question 3  

What is the mean level of (household head) educational attainment among individuals in the control gorup who **did** use ACT the last time they had malaria?

### Question 4  

What is the standard deviation of the level of (household head) educational attainment among individuals in the control gorup who **did** use ACT the last time they 
had malaria?  

### Question 5  

Is there a statistically significant difference in educational attainment between those (in the control group) who used ACT the last time they had malaria and those who did not?  What is the p-value associated with this hypothesis test?

### Question 6  

What is the estimated difference in educational attainment between those (in the control group) who used ACT the last time they had malaria and those who did not?  

### Question 7  

What is the standard error associated with the estimated difference in educational attainment between those (in the control group) who used ACT the last time they had malaria and those who did not?  

### Question 8  

To understand where this standard error comes from, remember that the mean value of `b_h_edu` among people who do (or do not) have `c_act==1` is a random variable, as is the difference in means between those who have `c_act==1` and those who have `c_act==0`.  The variance of the **difference** of two independent random variables is the **sum** of their individual variances, so the variance of the difference in `b_h_edu` between those with `c_act==1` and those with `c_act==0` is the sum of the variances of the subgroup means.  (And, of course, the standard error is the square root of the variance.)  If you used the results of your 

   ---
  
This exercise is part of [Module 2:  Selection Bias and the Experimental Ideal](https://pjakiela.github.io/ECON523/M2-selection-bias.html).
